'article_title' : 'Mahashivaratri',
'section_title' : 'Mahashivaratri'

MahaShivaratri or Shivaratri is celebrated across Hindu Communities around the world dedicated to Lord Shiva. Mahashivaratri or Shivaratri festival is celebrated on the new moon day in the Hindu month of Maagha.

Shiva met Rama in the forest who was in search of Sita Devi. The moment Shiva saw Rama, He bowed in front of Him. Sati didn’t believe and wanted put a test to Rama. Sati took the form of Sita and appeared in front of Rama but with His divine power Rama recognized Sati. Shiva detached Himself from Sati or leave Sati as His wife because Sati had the taken the form of Sita to test Lord Rama as Lord Shiva always worshipped Sita as His mother.

Due to Daksha’s action towards his daughter by not paying attention and not offering prasad for Shiva, Sati was very upset and she self-immolated by jumping into the fire. After the death of Sati, Shiva was furious and began performing Rudra Tandava (Dance of Destruction) thus demolishing the Kingdom of Daksha while carrying the body of Sati. Lord Vishnu severed Sati’s body into 12 Pieces and scattered them on earth which were later emerged as Shakti Peetha to calm down Shiva.

Sati took the re-birth as Parvati in Himalayas. Parvati was very much impressed with Shiva and wanted to break his meditation. Breaking Shiva’s meditation was very tough so she took help of Kaamadeva and He advised Parvati to dance in front of Shiva. Kaamadeva shot an arrow of Passion which immediately broke the Penance of Shiva. Out of anger, Shiva opened His Third-Eye and destroyed Kaamadeva into ashes but Rati (Kaamadeva’s Wife) utter plead revived Kaamadeva.

Parvati didn’t lose Her hope and Her sincere devotion and persuasion by Sages lured Lord Shiva to marry Her and Shiva was free from asceticism. Marriage of Shiva and Parvati, auspicious occasion, happened before Amavasya in the month of Falgun.

Marriage of Lord Shiva and Goddess Parvati is one of the version for celebrating MahaShivaratri.


Ideally, Neelkanth means Blue Throat.

According to ancient Telugu religious scripts, there was once a war between Gods and Demons to consume nectar which would make them immortal. Nectar was supposed to be produced by churning the ocean,  also known as Samudra Manthan, which was quite tedious. Both Gods and Demons were churning the ocean and while in the process of churning few Goddesses, Animals etc emerged from the ocean like Goddess Laxmi, Goddess Varuni, Kamadhenu, Airavat, Dhanvantari, Parijat and so on. While they were closer to securing nectar, a deadly poison called Halahala emerged from the ocean which terrified Gods and Demons. Everybody started knocking the doors of Lord of Creator, Lord of Protector, Saints but at last Lord of Destroyer, Shiva stepped in and vowed to protect everyone.

Lord Shiva consumed Halahala, a deadly poison, and fainted. Goddess Parvati immediately turned herself into Mahavidya thus stopping the poison flow till throat. Due to the heavy impact of poison, throat of Lord Shiva turned Blue. This is the reason Lord Shiva is also known as NeelKanth which means Neel (Blue) + Kanth (Throat). On that day, Gods and Demons didn’t sleep the whole night praying for Lord Shiva to wake up and finally Lord Shiva woke up the other day.

To celebrate Lord Shiva’s sacrifice for the well-being of Universe, devotees stay awake the whole night while observing Fasting whole-heartedly on the day of Shivaratri.


Once while travelling Lord Brahma reached the abode of Lord Vishnu. He observed Vishnu resting on SheshNaag (Divine Serpent). Lord Brahma commanded Vishnu to receive him as Brahma thought He (Brahma) is the supreme power but Lord Vishnu didn’t receive/greet Brahma due to His attitude. Brahma outraged with Vishnu’s behaviour resulting in battle between them which continued for a long time. All the deities arrived from the heaven to stop the battle instead battle became more intense. At last, deities decided to approach Lord Shiva seeking His help. Lord Shiva sent His 100 Ganas to pacify both of them (Lord Brahma and Vishnu). He too went accompanied by Goddess Parvati. When Lord Shiva reached the battlefield, He was surprised Lord Brahma and Vishnu were about to release His deadly weapons Maheshwar and Pashupat. Fearing a destruction, which these deadly weapons may cause, Shiva manifested Himself in the form of Analstamba which means Pillar of Fire between them. Though Brahma and Vishnu already released the deadly weapons, both weapons destroyed by falling into Pillar of Fire (Analstamba). Brahma and Vishnu were surprised to see the enormous Pillar of Fire where it reached the sky and penetrated down the earth. Lord Vishnu transformed himself into wild boar and went beneath the earth to find the limit of Pillar of Fire but He was unsuccessful in His attempt and admitted His defeat. Similarly Lord Brahma transformed Himself into a swan and flew up in the sky to find His limit. While going through the aerial route, He found Ketaki flower which had still Some freshness and fragrance left in it. Brahma learnt that Ketaki had been placed at the top of Pillar of Fire.

Lord Brahma sought the help of Ketaki flower and convinced her to give a false witness about Brahma finding the limit of Pillar Of Fire in the sky before Lord Vishnu. Lord Vishnu accepted the Superiority of Lord Brahma after Brahma acknowledged witnessing the limit of Pillar of Fire and Ketaki flower being a witness. Lord Shiva became furious with Brahma’s Falsehood and He proceeded to punish Brahma. Lord Vishnu pleaded Shiva to spare the life of Brahma but Shiva was very pleased with Vishnu and accorded Him same status as of His own. 

Shiva still wanted to punish Brahma for His deeds. Shiva manifested Himself by throwing a small nail from His finger taking the form of  fierce Bhairava. Bhairava beheaded the Fifth head of Lord Brahma with his sword. Brahma became so very terrified that He pleaded Shiva for His forgiveness. Shiva hated Brahma for His falsehood with a desire to become Supreme Power and cursed that Brahma will not be for worshipped by anybody. Hence Brahma would possess only Four heads. Brahma kept on pleading Shiva for His forgiveness to which Shiva felt pity at last and gave him a boon of presiding deity of yagnas. Similarly the Ketaki flower was cursed of not being the part during worship to which Ketaki pleaded for forgiveness too. Lord Shiva too gave her a boon to be fortunate when offered to Lord Vishnu during the worship. 

Finally, Lord Brahma and Vishnu offered prayers to Lord Shiva as the Supreme Power. Since then Mahashivaratri had been continued to be celebrated this particular day as an auspicious day for the worship of Lord shiva.